---
layout: post
title: Dependency Injection of URLs and URLSessions
subtitle: Much Benefit
---

[`URLSession`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundation/urlsession) "and related classes provide an API for downloading data from ... endpoints indicated by URLs." Most iOS developers are familiar with using the `URLSession` singleton, [`shared`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundation/urlsession/1409000-shared), which has "reasonable default behavior", including retrieving data from the actual endpoint represented by the `URL` specified.

But using `shared` in all circumstances has some drawbacks.

1. In a production app, during development of a new feature, the endpoint may not exist until late in the development cycle. Using `shared` means that development of the client-side UI of a new feature is blocked until development of the endpoint is complete.
2. Because using `shared` necessarily involves network access, use of `shared` in unit tests can cause those unit tests to be slow or to fail altogether.
3. The endpoint may not return the data needed to exercise all functionality of the app. For example, the app may have a special no-data-was-retrieved state, but if the actual endpoint has data, this state can't be triggered.

This post presents a solution to these three problems: using a stubbed version of `URLSession` and using alternate `URL` variants, both via dependency injection.

Paul Hudson described the `URLSession`-stubbing technique in [this excellent article](https://www.hackingwithswift.com/articles/153/how-to-test-ios-networking-code-the-easy-way). My post contains two refinements to his article, both described in the section `Acknowledgement`.

<!--excerpt-->

{% include image.html
    file="stubbing/hat.jpg"
    alt="WWDC Jacket Wearing a Pablo Sandoval Hat"
    caption="WWDC Jacket Wearing a Pablo Sandoval Hat"
    source_link=null
    half_width=false
%}

## Getting Started

For the rest of this post, I'll use a cat-breed [endpoint](https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds.json) I set up for my earlier [post](https://racecondition.software/blog/challenges/) about coding challenges. The endpoint returns JSON with this format:

```
{
  "breeds": [
    {
      "name": "Abyssinian",
      "popularity": 42,
      "known_for": "Egyptian appearance",
      "photo_url": "https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/img/Abyssinian.jpg",
      "info_url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abyssinian_cat",
      "credit": "Josh Adams",
      "license": "public_domain",
      "description": "The Abyssinian is a breed of domestic short-haired cat ..."
    },
    {
      "name": "Balinese",
      "popularity": 51,
      "known_for": "plumed tail",
      "photo_url": "https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/img/Balinese.jpg",
      "info_url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balinese_cat",
      "credit": "Pxhere",
      "license": "cc1",
      "description": "The Balinese is a long-haired breed of domestic cat ..."
    },
    ...
  ]
}
```

How to represent this data in an app's models is outside the scope of this post, but here is a simplified version of the models I used in my earlier post:

```
struct Breed: Decodable {
  let name: String
  let knownFor: String
  let popularity: Int
  let photoUrl: URL
  let infoUrl: URL
  let credit: String
  let license: String
  let description: String
}

struct Breeds: Decodable {
  let breeds: [Breed]
}
```

The code above and indeed _all_ code in this post are in [this repo](https://github.com/vermont42/FancyCat).

For reference, here is how [the app](https://github.com/vermont42/CatFancy) described in my earlier [post](https://racecondition.software/blog/challenges/) displays this data.

{% include image.html
    file="stubbing/breeds.png"
    alt="Some Breeds in CatFancy"
    caption="Some Breeds in CatFancy"
    source_link=null
    half_width=true
%}

## Vanilla URLSession.shared and URL

`URLSession` is like a protocol in that it represents a contract for retrieving `Data`s from endpoints. Unlike a protocol, `URLSession` has an initializer. This initializer takes a `URLSessionConfiguration`, [which](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundation/urlsessionconfiguration) is used "to configure the timeout values, caching policies, connection requirements, and other types of information that you intend to use with your `URLSession` object". In order to obviate the need to create a `URLSessionConfiguration` for simple download tasks, Apple provides a `URLSession.shared` singleton "that gives you a reasonable default behavior for creating tasks", allowing you "to fetch the contents of a URL to memory with just a few lines of code".

Here is how `URLSession.shared` can be used to fetch cat-breed data and convert it to the models shown above. This function and others like it live in an `enum` called `BreedRequester`.

```
static func requestBreedsClassicWithoutInjection(completion: @escaping ([Breed]?) -> ()) {
  URLSession.shared.dataTask(with: URL(string: "https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds.json")!) { data, _, error in
    if
      let data = data,
      error == nil
    {
      do {
        let decoder = JSONDecoder()
        decoder.keyDecodingStrategy = .convertFromSnakeCase
        let breeds = try decoder.decode(Breeds.self, from: data)
        completion(breeds.breeds)
      } catch {
        completion(nil)
      }
    } else {
      completion(nil)
    }
  }.resume()
}
```

Here is an invocation of that function that uses `URLSession.shared`:

```
BreedRequester.requestBreedsClassicWithoutInjection { breeds in
  if let breeds {
    print("Breed count using classic URLSession.dataTask without injection: \(breeds.count)")
  } else {
    fatalError("Classic breed-fetching without injection failed.")
  }
}
```

This implementation has the three problems described in the introduction to this post: that the endpoint may not exist during development, that network access in unit tests is slow and flaky, and that a successful response from the endpoint does not permit exercise of the no-data or error cases.

Apple has enhanced `URLSession` with an `async/await` implementation. The details of `async/await` are beyond the scope of this post, but I'll mention two value propositions of `async/await`: that the fetch appears, from the caller's perspective, synchronous, and there is no callback to futz with.

Here is how `URLSession.shared`, with `async/await` support, can be used to synchronously fetch cat-breed info and convert it to the models shown above:

```
static func requestBreedsSyncWithoutInjection() async -> [Breed]? {
  do {
    let (data, _) = try await URLSession.shared.data(from: URL(string: "https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds.json")!)
    let decoder = JSONDecoder()
    decoder.keyDecodingStrategy = .convertFromSnakeCase
    let breeds = try decoder.decode(Breeds.self, from: data)
    return breeds.breeds
  } catch {
    return nil
  }
}
```

Here is an invocation of that function that uses `URLSession.shared`:

```
Task {
  if let breeds = await BreedRequester.requestBreedsSyncWithoutInjection() {
    print("Breed count using synchronous URLSession.data without injection: \(breeds.count)")
  } else {
    fatalError("Synchronous breed-fetching without injection failed.")
  }
}
```

This invocation shows the no-callback value proposition of `async/await`. This _implementation_, however, shares the three drawbacks described above.

## Injecting URLSession and URL for Fun and Profit

The cause of problems 1 and 2 ("may not exist" and "slow and flaky") in the implementations above is their explicit dependency on `URLSession.shared`. That is, those implementations reach out for `URLSession.shared`, precluding any possibility of using some other variant of `URLSession` over which the client developer has control. `URLSession.shared` attempts to use the networking stack and the device's radios (Wi-Fi or cellular) to reach out to a real backend at the `URL` specified. But, as noted above, that backend may not exist during early phases of development. I encountered this situation in a previous jobby-job, where backend and client development of new features was sometimes concurrent. Even if the backend exists, communicating _with_ it via radio is slow and failure-prone, particularly in the context of a unit-test suite with thousands of tests.

The cause of problem 3 ("no exercise of the no-data or error cases") in the implementations above is their explicit dependency on a specific `URL`: `https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds.json`. Assuming, as one would likely do, that the backend works as intended, that backend returns valid breed data. That backend _doesn't_ ordinarily return an error or no breeds. But without a response of an error or no breeds, the developer can't develop the portion of the UI that handles these states.[^1] Here is an example of the sort of error UI that might be appropriate.

{% include image.html
    file="stubbing/error.png"
    alt="Error UI in CatFancy"
    caption="Error UI in CatFancy"
    source_link=null
    half_width=true
%}

The solution to all three problems is dependency injection. I have discussed this concept [elsewhere](https://racecondition.software/blog/dependency-injection/), but I define it here as "providing dependencies to functions that rely on them _rather than_ having those functions initialize or grab those dependencies on their own [behalves](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/behalves#English)". The nuts and bolts of providing those dependencies to a consuming function constitute a meaty topic, but I've got you [covered](https://racecondition.software/blog/dependency-injection/).

That said, the particular dependency-injection technique used is unimportant for the purpose of solving the problems described in this post. [CatFancy](https://github.com/vermont42/CatFancy) uses [The World](https://www.pointfree.co/blog/posts/21-how-to-control-the-world). For the sake of simplicity, this post will use [method injection](https://betterprogramming.pub/the-3-types-of-dependency-injection-141b40d2cebc). A framework like [Swinject](https://github.com/Swinject/Swinject) is another solid choice. The key is to use _some sort_ of dependency injection for the `URL` _and_ `URLSession`.

Injection of these two dependencies solves the three problems.

Injecting a stub `URLSession`, rather than relying on `URLSession.shared`, solves problems 1 and 2 ("may not exist" and "slow and flaky"). An injected `URLSession` can grab data directly from the app bundle, bypassing the networking stack and the device's radios entirely. This bundle access is fast and reliable.

Injecting an arbitrary `URL`, rather than relying on the `URL` at which data is expected to be found in production, solves problem 3 ("no exercise of the no-data or error cases"). In the happy path, the [ordinary `URL`](https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds.json) can be injected. But there can be alternate `URL`s for [an error](https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds_malformed.json) or [no data](https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds_empty.json). There can even be an [extra `URL`](https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds_with_more.json) for data that the backend doesn't provide but that is helpful for exercising the UI. I used this extra `URL` in a coding challenge where the provided `URL` accessed so little data that all rows fit into one screen, with no scrolling of the enclosing `UITableView`. The extra `URL` had more data, enabling exercise of the app's scrolling behavior.

## Implementation

Enabling injection of the stub `URLSession` and of arbitrary `URL`s involves the following steps.

### Making URLs Flexible

As described above, there need to be multiple `URL` variants for every endpoint, for example one featuring cat breeds expected to be accessed. The number and nature of the variants depend on the use case, but these are four variants I might implement for an app that retrieves a JSON file containing fourteen cat breeds from an endpoint and then displays those cat breeds in its UI:

1. `standard`: This is the actual `URL` of the endpoint. Assuming the backend works as expected, using this `URL` should result in the UI displaying fourteen cat breeds.
2. `empty`: This is the `URL` of an imaginary endpoint that returns a JSON file containing an empty array of cat breeds. This should trigger the no-data error state in the UI.
3. `malformed`: This is the `URL` of an imaginary endpoint that returns malformed JSON. This should trigger the bad-response error state in the UI.
4. `with_more`: This is the `URL` of an imaginary endpoint that returns a JSON file with _nineteen_ cat breeds. The UI should display these nineteen breeds. 

Here is the representation of those four `URL`s in code:

```
enum BreedsURL: String, CaseIterable {
  case standard
  case empty
  case malformed
  case withMore

  var url: URL {
    let standardURLString = "https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds.json"
    let emptyURLString = "https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds_empty.json"
    let malformedURLString = "https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds_malformed.json"
    let withMoreURLString = "https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds_with_more.json"

    let urlString: String

    switch self {
    case .standard:
      urlString = standardURLString
    case .empty:
      urlString = emptyURLString
    case .malformed:
      urlString = malformedURLString
    case .withMore:
      urlString = withMoreURLString
    }

    if let url = URL(string: urlString) {
      return url
    } else {
      fatalError("Could not initialize URL from \(urlString).")
    }
  }
}
```

### Adding Data to the App Bundle

JSON files containing no data, extra data, or malformed JSON don't ordinarily exist at a typical endpoint. A JSON file containing expected data _does_ exist at a typical endpoint, assuming that the endpoint has been implemented. But the goal of dependency injection, in this case, is to avoid reliance on _any_ particular endpoint. For the four JSON files to be available, even in the absence of a network call, those JSON files must be in the app bundle. In the cat-breed app, this means adding the following four files to the bundle: `breeds.json`, `breeds_empty.json`, `breeds_malformed.json`, and `breeds_with_more.json`.

Caveat lector: adding files to the project doesn't cause those files to be available in the app bundle, at least in a command-line tool like [FancyCat](https://github.com/vermont42/FancyCat). I added a build phase to copy those files to the app bundle, as shown here:

{% include image.html
    file="stubbing/copy.png"
    alt="Build Phase to Copy Files to App Bundle"
    caption="Build Phase to Copy Files to App Bundle"
    source_link=null
    half_width=false
%}

### Implementing the Stub URLSession and URLProtocol Subclass

Recall the goal of creating an injectable `URLSession` that can potentially replace use of `URLSession.shared`. In industry parlance, this object is a stub, which Ibrahima Ciss [defines](https://youtu.be/0lVWl3-B2w4?t=148) as an object that "[p]rovides hard-coded answers to the calls performed during [a] test". `stubSession` is a good name for this injectable `URLSession`. Following the Hudson [example](https://www.hackingwithswift.com/articles/153/how-to-test-ios-networking-code-the-easy-way), I recommend implementing `stubSession` as a `static var` on `URLSession`. Here is that implementation, followed by explanatory comments.

```
extension URLSession {
  static var didProcessURLs = false

  static var stubSession: URLSession {
    // 1
    if !didProcessURLs {
      BreedsURL.allCases.forEach {
        if let path = Bundle.main.path(forResource: $0.url.lastPathComponent, ofType: nil) {
          do {
            let data = try Data(contentsOf: URL(fileURLWithPath: path))
            URLProtocolStub.urlDataDict[$0.url] = data
          } catch {
            fatalError("Unable to load mock JSON data for URL \($0.url).")
          }
        }
      }

      didProcessURLs = true
    }

    // 2
    let config = URLSessionConfiguration.ephemeral
    config.protocolClasses = [URLProtocolStub.self]
    return URLSession(configuration: config)
  }
}
```

As promised, here are the explanatory comments.

1\. For the injection to work, there needs to be a mapping between `URL`s and files in the app bundle. The first access of `stubSession` is a natural place for this to happen. By way of example, in CatFancy and FancyCat, the `URL` `https://raceconditionsoftware.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/CatFancy/breeds_with_more.json` is mapped to the app-bundle file `breeds_with_more.json`.

2\. Recall that the `URLSession` stub, which must ultimately call the `URLSession` initializer, requires a `URLSessionConfiguration`, [which](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundation/urlsessionconfiguration) is used "to configure the timeout values, caching policies, connection requirements, and other types of information that you intend to use with your `URLSession` object." In section `// 2` of the code above, a `URLSessionConfiguration` is initialized and configured with a `URLProtocol` subclass, shown below. This `URLSessionConfiguration` is then used to initialize the stub `URLSession`.

Here is the implementation of that `URLProtocol` subclass, followed by explanatory comments.

```
class URLProtocolStub: URLProtocol {
  // 1
  static var urlDataDict: [URL: Data] = [:]

  // 2
  override class func canInit(with request: URLRequest) -> Bool {
    true
  }

  // 2
  override class func canonicalRequest(for request: URLRequest) -> URLRequest {
    request
  }

  // 2
  override func startLoading() {
    if
      let url = request.url,
      let data = URLProtocolStub.urlDataDict[url]
    {
      client?.urlProtocol(self, didReceive: URLResponse(), cacheStoragePolicy: .notAllowed)
      client?.urlProtocol(self, didLoad: data)
    } else {
      client?.urlProtocol(self, didFailWithError: LoadingError.loadFailed)
    }
    client?.urlProtocolDidFinishLoading(self)
  }

  // 2
  override func stopLoading() {}

  // 3
  enum LoadingError: Error {
    case loadFailed
  }
}
```

As promised, here are the explanatory comments.

1\. This `Dictionary` contains mappings between `URL`s and `Data`s from the app bundle.

2\. Although `URLProtocol` is technically a class, it acts like a protocol in that it represents a _contract_ with methods for subclassers to implement. These implementations are largely boilerplate. The interesting function is `startLoading()`, which uses the dictionary defined in section `// 1` to return data corresponding to the `URL` specified. In my implementation, `startLoading()` succeeds for every valid `URL`, but one could imagine enhancing this function to return `Error`s in certain scenarios, for testing purposes. 🐬 As Jon Shier suggested by way of feedback to this post, one could "enhance [the] `URLProtocol` [implementation] to allow delayed responses", enabling more-realistic testing.

3\. This `enum` could facilitate returning `Error`s in certain scenarios.

## Injection in Practice

The implementations above enable injection of a `URLSession` and of a `URL`, solving problems 1 and 2, and 3: "may not exist", "slow and flaky", and "no exercise of the no-data or error cases".

Here is the invocation of the classic `URLSession.dataTask` with dependency injection. This invocation involves neither a radio nor a networking stack.

```
BreedRequester.requestBreedsClassicWithInjection(session: URLSession.stubSession, url: BreedsURL.standard.url) { breeds in
  if let breeds {
    print("Breed count using classic URLSession.dataTask with injection: \(breeds.count)")
  } else {
    fatalError("Classic breed-fetching with injection failed.")
  }
}
```

The first line of that snippet uses `BreedsURL.standard`, but use of `.empty`, `.malformed`, or `.withMore` would trigger the no-data error state, bad-response error state, and extra-data success state, respectively.

Here is the invocation of async `URLSession.data`. This invocation also involves neither a radio nor a networking stack.

```
Task {
  if let breeds = await BreedRequester.requestBreedsSyncWithInjection(url: BreedsURL.standard.url, session: URLSession.stubSession) {
    print("Breed count using synchronous URLSession.data with injection: \(breeds.count)")
  } else {
    fatalError("Synchronous breed-fetching with injection failed.")
  }
}
```

The _second_ line of that snippet uses `BreedsURL.standard`, but use of `.empty`, `.malformed`, or `.withMore` would trigger the no-data error data, bad-response error state, and extra-data success state, respectively.

In both invocations, use of `URLSession.shared` rather than `URLSession.stubSession`, for example during ordinary use of an app, would trigger use of the networking stack and of the device's radios.

## Acknowledgement

I am grateful to Paul Hudson for [introducing](https://www.hackingwithswift.com/articles/153/how-to-test-ios-networking-code-the-easy-way) me to the concept of a stub `URLSession` and for providing me with an implementation of one. I hope that this post has provided additional value to readers by introducing them to the benefits of an injected `URL` and by providing readers with an implementation of `URLProtocol.startLoading()` whose addition of the lines below fixed a crash I ran into while using `async/await`, which was unavailable at the time Mr. Hudson wrote his article.

```
} else {
  client?.urlProtocol(self, didFailWithError: LoadingError.loadFailed)
}
```

## Endnote

[^1]: Strictly speaking, the preceding statement is untrue. Here are two ways that error UI could be developed. First, the developer could modify the code to simulate an error response without performing an actual API call. The disadvantage of this approach is that it differs from actual operation of an app, so the developer would wonder whether the error UI is actually triggered in production when expected. Second, the developer could use an app like [Charles Proxy](https://www.charlesproxy.com) to intercept the API call and return an error message or no data. This second approach has two disadvantages. First, Charles Proxy has a formidable learning curve. By my count, the app has, on launch, eleven buttons, seven tabs, eight menus, and eighty-four menu items. Second, configuration of Charles Proxy is tricky, particularly in a locked-down corporate IT environment. To this end, at a previous employer, I wrestled with multiple Confluence pages, and I still had to ask for help, which was, thank goodness, readily available.
